.. _scheduling:

############
 Scheduling
############

This topic guide covers the two different scheduling policies that are
supported in Determined. Administrators can configure the desired
scheduler in :ref:`master-configuration`. It is also possible to
configure different scheduling behavior for different :ref:`resource
pools <resource-pools>`.

Once the scheduling policy has been defined for the current master
and/or resource pool, the scheduling behavior of an individual task is
influenced by several task configuration values:

-  For the fair-share scheduler, ``resources.weight`` lets users set the
   resource demand of a task relative to other tasks.

-  For the priority scheduler, ``resources.priority`` lets users assign
   a priority order to tasks.

-  Regardless of the scheduler, ``searcher.max_concurrent_trials`` lets
   users cap the number of slots that an ``adaptive_asha``
   hyperparameter search experiment will request at any given time.

.. note::

   Zero-slot tasks (e.g., CPU-only notebooks, tensorboards) are
   scheduled independently of tasks that require slots (e.g.,
   experiments, GPU notebooks). The fair-share scheduler schedules
   zero-slot tasks on a FIFO basis. The priority scheduler schedules
   zero-slot tasks based on priority.

************
 Fair-Share
************

The master allocates cluster resources (*slots*) among the active
experiments using a weighted fair-share scheduling policy. Slots are
divided among the active experiments according to the *demand* (number
of desired concurrent tasks) of each experiment. For instance, in an
eight-GPU cluster running two experiments with demands of ten and
thirty, the scheduler assigns two slots and six slots respectively. As
new experiments become active or the resource demand of an active
experiment changes, the scheduler will adjust how slots are allocated to
experiments as appropriate.

The behavior of the fair-share scheduler can be modified by changing the
*weight* of a workload. A workload's demand for slots is multiplied by
the workload's weight for scheduling purposes; hence, a workload with a
higher weight will be assigned proportionally more resources than a
workload with lower weight. The default weight is ``1``. For example, in
the scenario above, if the weight of the first experiment is set to 3
and the weight of the second experiment is set to 1, each experiment
will be assigned four slots.

**********
 Priority
**********

The master allocates cluster resources (*slots*) to active tasks based
on their *priority*. While tasks of higher priority (lower priority
number) are pending, no lower priority tasks will be scheduled. For
instance, if tasks with priorities of five and forty-two are pending,
the latter will not be scheduled until the former has been. Tasks of
equal priority are scheduled in the order in which they were created.

By default, the priority scheduler does not use preemption. If
preemption is enabled (:ref:`master-configuration`), when a higher
priority task is pending and cannot be scheduled because no idle
resources are available, the scheduler will attempt to schedule it by
preempting lower priority tasks, starting with the task with the lowest
priority. When a trial is preempted, its state is checkpointed so that
the progress of the trial is not lost. Enabling preemption ensures that
cluster resources can be reallocated to high priority tasks more
promptly; however, preemption can also result in additional overhead due
to checkpointing low priority tasks, which might be expensive for some
models.

.. note::

   Notebooks, tensorboards, shells, and commands are not preemptible.
   These tasks will continue to occupy cluster resources until they
   complete or are terminated.

Here is an example of how the priority scheduler behaves with preemption
enabled:

#. User submits a priority 2 adaptive_asha experiment with
   max_concurrent_trials 20 and slots_per_trial 1. 8 trials run and
   utilize all 8 GPUs.

#. User submits a priority 1 distributed training experiment with
   slots_per_trial 4. 4 ASHA trials are preempted so the new distributed
   training experiment can run. Note that if preemption was not enabled,
   the new experiment would not get scheduled until the ASHA
   experiment's GPU demand becomes <= 4.

#. User starts a priority 3 notebook with resources.slots 1. The
   notebook has a lower priority than the two active experiments, so it
   will run as soon as the two active experiments collectively need <= 7
   GPUs.

#. ASHA and the distributed training experiment both complete, and the
   notebook task with priority 3 will run.

#. User submits a priority 1 distributed training experiment with
   slots_per_trial 8. Although this workload has a higher priority than
   the active notebook task, it cannot be scheduled because it requires
   8 slots, notebooks are not preemptible, and therefore only 7 slots
   are available.

#. User submits a priority 2 distributed training experiment with
   slots_per_trial 4. It will not be scheduled even though 7 slots are
   available, because it is behind a higher priority pending task.

#. The notebook is killed. The distributed training job that has
   priority 1 then starts running. Once that experiment is complete,
   distributed training experiment with priority 2 runs.

*******************************
 Gang-scheduling on Kubernetes
*******************************

Kubernetes does not natively support gang-scheduling and its default
scheduler will schedule pods on a first-come-first-serve basis. This
approach is problematic if a user submits several multi-pod jobs at
once; first-come-first-serve could result in a cluster deadlock.
Determined is able to support gang-scheduling by using the lightweight
coscheduling plugin, which extends the Kubernetes scheduler and blocks
scheduling of pods unless there are enough resources for all the pods in
the job. To function, the plugin requires special labels to be set that
specify the amount of nodes that each job needs for execution.
Determined is able to automatically calculate and set these labels for
its experiments.

Importantly, the coscheduling plugin does not work with cluster
autoscaling. Static node pools must be used to achieve gang-scheduling.
Also, while the plugin allocates resources to jobs based on their
priority, it does not support preemption. Any low priority task will be
able to finish before a higher priority task can begin running.
Additionally, there isn't an implementation of ``max_slots`` or
``max_concurrent_trials`` that would limit the resources of an
experiment, i.e. one for hyperparameter search. Lastly, Determined's
capability to automatically set pod labels is restricted to GPU
experiments; it is unable to do the same for CPU experiments or user
commands. If gang-scheduling is desired for these, it must be set
manually via the environment field in the config. For instance:

.. code::

   environment:
      pod_spec:
         metadata:
            labels:
               pod-group.scheduling.sigs.k8s.io/name: determined
               pod-group.scheduling.sigs.k8s.io/min-available: "2"
