.. _workspaces:

#########################
 Workspaces and Projects
#########################

You can organized your experiments into *projects* and *workspaces*. A project is a collection of
experiments, and a workspace is a collection of projects. :doc:`Experiment Configuration
</reference/training/experiment-config-reference>` specifies the location of a newly created
experiment. If a workspace and project are not specified, the experiment is created in the default,
``Uncategorized`` project. Experiments can be moved between projects, and projects can be moved
between workspaces.

*****************
 Getting Started
*****************

Initially, a Determined installation has one workspace containing one project, both titled
``Uncategorized``. Both are considered immutable, which means that they cannot be renamed, archived,
or deleted, and the project cannot be moved to a different workspace. However, you can move an
experiment into or out of an ``Uncategorized`` project at any time.

To create workspaces and projects for individuals or teams who are using Determined, use ``det
workspace create`` and ``det project create``. This is recommended for larger teams.

.. code::

   det workspace create <workspace name>
   det project create <workspace name> <project name>

*******
 Usage
*******

WebUI
=====

After signing in, the dashboard displays. This is the default landing page for the WebUI. The
dashboard is where you'll find the most recently submitted jobs and your recently viewed projects.

Selecting the navigation sidebar **Workspaces** button opens the **Workspaces List** page. This page
displays all workspaces that currently exist on a cluster.

Selecting the icon in the upper right corner of a workspace card displays the action menu. The
action menu always contains the option to pin a workspace, which creates an easy access link to the
workspace on the sidebar. If the workspace was created by the currently signed-in user, or if the
current user is an administrator, the action menu also provides the options to edit the workspace
name, archive the workspace, or delete the workspace. Deleting a workspace is permanent and also
deletes all projects contained within it. A workspace cannot be deleted if its projects contain
experiments.

Selecting a workspace card opens the **Workspace Details** page. This page shows all currently
selected workspace projects. If a project was created by the currently signed-in user, or if the
current user is an administrator, click the icon in the upper right corner of the project card to
bring up another action menu. This action menu contains the options to edit the project name and
description, move the project to a different workspace, archive the project, or delete the project
if it does not contain experiments.

Selecting a project card opens the **Project Details** page. This page shows the experiments that
currently exist for the selected project. The Notes tab lets you create, read, edit, and delete
notes about the selected project.

CLI
===

In the CLI, use the ``det workspace`` and ``det project`` commands to interact with workspaces and
projects. Use the ``-h`` flag to get a list of all possible commands.

.. code::

   det workspace -h
   det project -h

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :hidden:

   Binding Resource Pools to Workspaces <workspaces-rpools>
