.. _install-using-docker:

Install Determined Using Docker
===============================

Preliminary Setup
-----------------

#. :ref:`Install Docker <install-docker>` on all machines in the
   cluster. If the agents have GPUs, ensure that the
   :ref:`nvidia-docker2 installation <validate-nvidia-docker2>` on each
   one is working as expected.

#. Pull the official Docker images for PostgreSQL and Hasura. We
   recommend using the versions listed below.

   .. code::

      docker pull postgres:10
      docker pull hasura/graphql-engine:v1.1.0

   These images are not provided by Determined AI; please see their
   respective Docker Hub pages (`PostgreSQL
   <https://hub.docker.com/_/postgres>`_, `Hasura
   <https://hub.docker.com/r/hasura/graphql-engine>`_) for more
   information.

#. Pull the Docker image for the master or agent on each machine
   (replace ``VERSION`` with a valid Determined version, such as the
   current version, |version|):

   ..
      It seems to be impossible to use substitutions (e.g., |version|)
      inside code blocks, unfortunately.

   .. code::

      docker pull determinedai/determined-master:VERSION
      docker pull determinedai/determined-agent:VERSION

Configuring and Starting the Cluster
------------------------------------

Determined Master and Agents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:ref:`Configuration values <cluster-configuration>` can come from a
file, environment variables, or command-line arguments. To get a default
configuration file for the master, which contains a listing of the
available options and descriptions for them, run:

.. code::

   id="$(docker create determinedai/determined-master:VERSION)"
   docker cp "$id":/etc/determined/master.yaml .
   docker rm "$id"

Then edit the configuration file (``master.yaml``) as appropriate and
run

.. code::

   docker run -v "$PWD"/master.yaml:/etc/determined/master.yaml determinedai/determined-master:VERSION

to start the master with the edited config file. The process for the
agent is the same, except that "master" should be replaced by "agent"
everywhere it appears.

Environment variables and command-line arguments can be passed as usual
for Docker:

.. code::

   docker run -e DET_DB_HOST=the-db-host determinedai/determined-master:VERSION --db-port=5432
   docker run -e DET_MASTER_HOST=the-master-host determinedai/determined-agent:VERSION run --master-port=8080

Note that the agent requires ``run`` as the first argument if any
arguments are provided.

By default, the agent will use all the GPUs on the machine to run
Determined tasks; this behavior can be changed at startup using the
`NVIDIA_VISIBLE_DEVICES
<https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-container-runtime#nvidia_visible_devices>`_
environment variable. GPUs can also be disabled and enabled at runtime
using the ``det slot disable`` and ``det slot enable`` CLI commands,
respectively.

Docker Networking for Master and Agents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As with any Docker container, the networking mode of the master and
agent can be changed using the ``--network`` option to ``docker run``.
In particular, host mode networking (``--network host``) can be useful
to optimize performance and in situations where a container needs to
handle a large range of ports, as it does not require network address
translation (NAT) and no "userland-proxy" is created for each port.

The host networking driver only works on Linux hosts, and is not
supported on Docker Desktop for Mac, Docker Desktop for Windows, or
Docker EE for Windows Server.

See `Docker's documentation <https://docs.docker.com/network/host/>`_
for more details.

Managing the Cluster
--------------------

By default, ``docker run`` will run in the foreground, so that a
container can be stopped simply by pressing Control-C. If you wish to
keep Determined running for the long term, consider running the
containers `detached
<https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/run/#detached--d>`_ and/or
with `restart policies
<https://docs.docker.com/config/containers/start-containers-automatically/>`_.
Using :ref:`our deployment tool <install-using-deploy>` is also an
option.
