.. _install-using-packages:

Install Determined Using Debian Packages
========================================

For systems running Ubuntu 16.04 or 18.04, we support installing the
Determined master and agent using Debian packages and running them as
systemd services rather than Docker containers. We also provide an
unofficial means of doing the same for Hasura, which does not otherwise
support package-based installation. Other Debian-based systems are
likely to work as well, but we have not tested them.

For PostgreSQL, you should use either your Linux distribution's package
and service or a :ref:`Docker container <install-using-docker>`.

Preliminary Setup
-----------------

Master and Agent
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. Go to `the webpage for the latest Determined release
   <https://github.com/determined-ai/determined/releases/latest>`_.

#. Download the appropriate package file, which will have the name
   ``determined-master_VERSION_linux_amd64.deb`` (with ``VERSION``
   replaced by an actual version, such as |version|).

#. Run

   .. code::

      sudo apt-get install <path to downloaded file>

Before running the Determined agent, you will have to :ref:`install
Docker <install-docker>` on each agent machine and, if the machine
has GPUs, ensure that the :ref:`nvidia-docker2 installation
<validate-nvidia-docker2>` is working as expected.

Apart from that, the agent follows the same process as the master,
except that "master" should be replaced by "agent" everywhere it
appears.

Hasura
~~~~~~

We recommend running Hasura on the same machine as the master, though
that is not required.

#. Go to `the webpage for the latest Hasura packaging release
   <https://github.com/dzhu/hasura-pkg/releases/latest>`_.

#. Download the package file, which will have a name that looks like
   ``hasura_VERSION_amd64.deb``.

#. Install the package file.

   .. code::

      sudo apt-get install <path to downloaded file>

Configuring and Starting the Cluster
------------------------------------

#. Ensure that an instance of PostgreSQL is running and accessible from
   the machine or machines where Hasura and the master will be run.

#. Edit the :ref:`YAML configuration files <topic-guides_yaml>` at
   ``/etc/determined/master.yaml`` (for the master) and
   ``/etc/determined/agent.yaml`` (for each agent) as appropriate for
   your setup.

#. Edit the Hasura configuration file at ``/etc/hasura/hasura.conf``.
   That file is not a YAML file, but rather a shell script that defines
   environment variables that are then interpreted by Hasura. See
   `Hasura's documentation
   <https://docs.hasura.io/1.0/graphql/manual/deployment/graphql-engine-flags/reference.html>`_
   for more information.

#. Start the Hasura service on the master machine.

   .. code::

      sudo systemctl start hasura

#. Start the master.

   .. code::

      sudo systemctl start determined-master

   The master can also be run directly with the command
   ``determined-master``, which may be helpful for experimenting with
   Determined (e.g., testing different configuration options quickly
   before writing them to the configuration file).

#. Start the agent on each agent machine.

   .. code::

      sudo systemctl start determined-agent

   Similarly, the agent can be run with the command
   ``determined-agent``.

Managing the Cluster
--------------------

To configure a service to start running automatically when its machine
boots up, run ``sudo systemctl enable <service>``, where the service is
``determined-master``, ``determined-agent``, or ``hasura``. (You can
also use ``sudo systemctl enable --now <service>`` to enable and
immediately start a service in one command.)

To view the logging output of a service, run ``journalctl -u
<service>``.

To manually stop a service, run ``sudo systemctl stop <service>``.
