.. _workspaces:

#########################
 Workspaces and Projects
#########################

Experiments can be organized into **projects** and **workspaces**. A project is a collection of
experiments, and a workspace is a collection of projects. The location of a newly created experiment
is specified in the :doc:`Experiment Config </training-apis/experiment-config>`. If a workspace and
project arenâ€™t specified, the experiment will be created in the default ``Uncategorized`` project.
Experiments can be moved between projects, and projects can be moved between workspaces.

*****************
 Getting Started
*****************

Initially, a Determined installation has one workspace containing one project, both titled
``Uncategorized``. These are both considered immutable, meaning that they cannot be renamed,
archived, or deleted, and the project cannot be moved to a different workspace, though experiments
can be moved in or out of the ``Uncategorized`` project at will.

Use ``det workspace create`` and ``det project create`` to create workspaces and projects for
indidivuals or teams using Determined. This is highly recommended, especially for larger teams.

.. code::

   det workspace create <workspace name>
   det project create <workspace name> <project name>

*******
 Usage
*******

WebUI
=====

Once logged in, the default landing page for the WebUI is the Uncategorized Experiments List. This
is where any experiments that don't have a ``workspace`` and ``project`` in their config files will
end up (as well as any experiments that were created prior to this feature's existence).

Clicking on the "Workspaces" button on the navigation sidebar will take the user to the Workspaces
List page. This page shows all of the workspaces that currently exist on a cluster. Clicking on the
icon in the upper right corner of a workspace card brings up an action menu. The action menu always
contains the option to pin a workspace, which will create a link to it on the sidebar for easy
access. If the workspace in question was created by the currently logged in user (or if the current
user is an admin), the action menu will also provide the choice to edit the workspace's name,
archive the workspace, or delete the workspace. Deleting a workspace is permanent, and will also
delete all projects contained within it. A workspace cannot be deleted if it's projects contain any
experiments.

Clicking on a workspace card will take the user to the Workspace Details page. This page shows all
of the projects that currently exist inside the selected workspace. If a project was created by the
currently logged in user (or if the current user is an admin), clicking on the icon in the upper
right corner of the project card brings up another action menu. This action menu contains the
options to edit the project's name and/or description, move the project to a different workspace,
archive the project, or (if the project is empty of experiments) delete the project.

Clicking on a project card will take the user to the Project Details page. This page shows all of
the experiments that currently exist inside the selected project. There is another tab that lets
users create, read, edit, and delete multiple pages of notes about the selected project.

CLI
===

In the CLI, the ``det workspace`` and ``det project`` commands can be used to interact with
workspaces and projects. The `-h` flag can be used to get a list of all possible commands.

.. code::

   det workspace -h
   det project -h
